Lab 9.1: Critical Sections

a. Explain the term critical section.
(This is basic repetition of class material)

A critical section is a segment of code that accesses shared resources 
(such as variables, data structures, or devices) that must not be concurrently 
executed by more than one thread or process. If multiple threads enter this 
section at the same time without proper coordination, race conditions can occur,
potentially corrupting shared data.
-> protect critical section from concurrent execution


b. Explain the two core requirements that a valid synchronization primitive for critical
sections has to fulfill. Furthermore explain additional desirable properties.
(This is basic repetition of class material)

Mutual Exclusion
At most one thread can be in the CS at any time

Progress
No thread running outside of the CS may block another thread from getting in
If no thread is in the CS, a thread trying to enter will eventually get in
If no thread can enter CS -> don’t have progress

Bounded Waiting/Fairness
Once a thread starts waiting to enter the critical section, 
there should be a limit on the number of times other threads can enter before
that waiting thread gets its turn. This prevents starvation.

Performance
The synchronization mechanism should impose minimal overhead, 
both in the uncontended case (when no other thread is waiting) 
and when contention is present, to avoid unnecessary delays.


c. Recap the banking example from the previous question. How could the race condition
be avoided?
current = get balance ( ) ;
current += delta ;
set balance ( current ) ;

To avoid this Critical Section we can use a synchronization mechanism
to ennsure that the entire sequence is executed atomically by only one thread at a time

for example:
lock(mutex);
current = get_balance ();
current += delta;
set_balance (current);
unlock(mutex);

by using a lock, we ensure that once a thread begins updating the balance, 
no other thread can read or modify it until the lock is realeased,
this is how we keep the consistency of the balance correct